---
layout: post
title: The 2020 eSMB meeting
subtitle: The sessions of the Cell and Developmental Biology group
tags: [SMB Meeting]
comments: true
---

One thing was already clear before the 2020 SMB meeting started: this was going to be a very different experience from last year. Over 1700 participants from all over the world gathered into an office building the size of a computer screen, to attend a fully online conference. While the format was born out of necessity, it also meant that many more people were able to attend. No flights, no fully-booked hotels - but depending on your time zone, you may have had to get up a bit early…
The uptick in participants also meant that there were many great talks to fill the Cell and Developmental Biology slots. The minisymposia and contributed talks covered a variety of topics, from single cell expression and mechanics to tissue patterning and folding; from pure theory to data analysis. Many talks had a strong emphasis on combining theory and experiment, reflecting the great advancements in single cell sequencing and microscopy.

Below, we will give you a brief overview of the Cell and Developmental biology conference sessions, with links to the talk abstracts; also check out the [beautiful graphical summaries](https://smb-celldevbio.github.io/2020-11-28-SMB2020/) by [Maria Abou Chakra](http://individual.utoronto.ca/abouchakra/). We hope that you’ll be inspired to participate in next year’s Cell and Developmental Biology sessions at the SMB meeting!

On Monday the meeting was kicked off with contributed talks around [tissue pattern formation](/uploads/abstracts_smb2020/monday_ct1.md), whether due to Turing patterns, cell cycle duration or Adhesion. 
This was followed by the Monday minisymposium on [Modelling cell dynamics in single cell biology](/uploads/abstracts_smb2020/monday_ms.md). The first day was concluded by a contributed-talks session revolving around finding and understanding [developmental cell lineages](/uploads/abstracts_smb2020/monday_ct2.md), using mechanistic models and scRNA sequencing data.

On Tuesday the morning contributed talks session centered around [cell migration and gradient sensing](/uploads/abstracts_smb2020/tuesday_ct1.md), followed by a minisymposium on [shapes, patterns and forces in developmental biology](/uploads/abstracts_smb2020/tuesday_ms.md). Finally, the afternoon [contributed talks](/uploads/abstracts_smb2020/tuesday_ct2.md) featured Bayesian models of chromosome segregation and simulations of noise in gene regulatory networks.

Wednesday began with contributed talks on [plant development](/uploads/abstracts_smb2020/wednesday_ct1.md). This was followed by a minisymposium on [understanding development through theory and experiment](/uploads/abstracts_smb2020/wednesday_ms.md), featuring tissue morphogenesis and signalling. Wednesday’s last contributed talks were a [diverse mix](/uploads/abstracts_smb2020/wednesday_ct2.md), with topics ranging from spindle positioning, astrocyte migration and evo-devo. 

Thursday, the last day of the meeting, started with a minisymposium on [the interplay of intracellular pattern formation, geometry, polarisation and mechanics](/uploads/abstracts_smb2020/thursday_ms.md), featuring intracellular oscillations, Turing patterns and planar cell polarity. Then it was time for the subgroup keynote, by Adam Martin, on [folding tissues across length scales: Cell-based origami](/uploads/abstracts_smb2020/keynote.md). He showed how tissue folding by apical constriction results from the arrangement of actomyosin into a connected network of oriented fibers, which then constrict in a pulsatile manner. This process also requires extensive upstream signalling. The very last session on Thursday contained contributed talks on [integrating cell mechanics and cell mechanosensing](/uploads/abstracts_smb2020/thursday_ct.md).

Thanks to all these great speakers for making the SMB 2020 such an interesting conference!
